---
meta:
  - title: BN | Blog | Bike Ride
  - name: description
    content: A Reflection on my Bike Ride from Porto to Bilbao

attributes:
  date: Jul 30, 2018
  source: medium
  url: https://medium.com/@blakenetz/a-reflection-on-my-bike-ride-from-porto-to-bilbao-95c2013bac67
---

export const meta = frontmatter.meta;
export const headers = frontmatter.headers;
export const attributes = frontmatter.attributes;

# A Reflection on my Bike Ride from Porto to Bilbao

![My bicycle on a bridge in Portugal](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/format:webp/1*e_uwKaW998AgebwC2iTQsw.jpeg)
_My home for months on end_

## Preface

I decided to write this as a retrospective because I wanted to avoid the
trickeries of first impressions. Like street swindler, impressions draw me in
with their theatrics and then leave me a dollar short. Instead, I let my
experiences simmer. The upfront awe or misery burn off, leaving behind a rich,
developed memory. In regards to this story, had I captured everything on the
fly, it would have been thick with complaints of sore muscles, grey skies, and
broken spirits. As this was my first bike tour, I quickly discovered that
moments of beauty and accomplishments are threaded through a long narrative of
hill climbs, bodily aches, and uncooperative weather, yet when such moments do
shine through, it makes it all worth while. With that said, here is an
abbreviated account of a bike ride from glasses of Port wine to plates of
_Pintxos_.

## Me

This trip was my first bike tour. I've spent a decent amount of time on two
wheels for commuting and have, within the past couple years, picked up mountain
biking as a hobby. Sure I consider myself a velo-connoisseur of sorts because I
can change a flat, but my expertise quickly dwindled when I venture out of basic
maintenance.

## The Trip

This trip was born out of a want to travel, but was immediately confined by the
desire to escape the grand tourist circuits. You know the kind, an endless
stream of travelers all visiting the same cities, eating the same foods, seeing
the same sights, taking the same pictures; it can really zap the magic out of
what was once a unique experience. So after catching wind of this “bikepacking”
concept, which is essentially bike touring on dirt and camping along the way, I
decided to give it a shot. I broadly chose Europe as the destination, Portugal
as the start, and somewhere East of Portugal as the finish.

Which brings us to the international airport of Porto. After an anxious 30
minutes waiting for my bike to show up, a battered box containing an unscathed
2018 Marin Four Corners and panniers full of polyester clothing, notebooks, and
some other typical travel supplies, materializes on the oversized luggage
carousal.

I spend around 5 nights in Porto; I booked for 6, but cut it a day short because
the open road was beckoning. Unlike other European cities, Porto isn't needy.
The city doesn't feel a need to boast about a roman artifact or a celebrated
style of cooking. Instead, with a warm smile, the people will greet you as an
equal, and then offer you a glass of _vino verde_ (a slightly carbonated white
wine) and an unpretentious dish of _bacalhau_ (cod) — take it or leave it.

![A collage of pictures from Porto](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/format:webp/1*q5G_OePaUFNHW1bDpi48FQ.jpeg)
_Shots from Porto_

From Porto I started north on the Eurovelo 1, which is 1 of 15 long-distance
bike paths that crisscross Europe (although I warn you that some sections of it
are more conceptual then anything). The times I did find myself on 5'-wide red
bike path was great, but I quickly noticed a pattern: every time the path
approached a town or city, it would abruptly vanish, leaving me to navigate a
labyrinth of tiny cobblestone _ruas_ (streets). This pattern would last me till
the Spanish border, yet before I switched countries, there was one last thing I
need to experience: the mighty _francesinha_.

The _francesinha_ is a monumental fork-and-knife sandwich made of 3 different of
meats, smothered in cheese and gravy, and then- if that wasn't enough- topped
with a fried egg. It's heavenly and wrong and delicious and casts a long shadow
on American food gluttony (the waiter typically stops by to “top off” the
gravy). Afterwards, your mind is in a fog and all bodily mechanics slow down, as
if your stomach is calling in assistance from nearby organs.

After recovering from the _francesinha_ hangover, I approach the border of
Spain. I'm expecting a clear juxtaposition between the two countries: a change
of language, food, and people. Yet when I crossed over the borderline of the
Minho River, it wasn't Spain waiting for me on the other side; it was the
strange, unexpected world of Galicia.

A quick history on Spain from someone who's only had a quick history of Spain:

As is common in many countries, Spain is divided into smaller regions that have
their own level of authority. Yet unlike the Federalist system I experience in
the US, Spain is divided into autonomous communities, which is conceptually the
same as American states, but are granted a tremendous amount of power. And as
follows, each autonomous community has their own unique and strongly held
identity, often to the extent where they have their own language.

This concept of regional identity led me to have many interesting conversations
with the locals. From what I could gather with my second-rate Spanish and
numerous hand signals, it wasn't always clear if Spaniards could recognize who
their fellow countryman was or why it matters. I realize this is a gross
oversimplification of a series of complicated ongoing issue, but I see this as
yet another form of the “us vs. them” narrative. In the US, Italy, and Great
Britain, a conversation of the same essence is happening, but it stems from a
place of fear or anger. Here in Spain, it seemed to have originated in pride and
in some cases reached a conclusion once the delineations were set. Though the
intents, stage, and immediate results are vastly different, these conversations
are about the separation of a population with the goal of benefiting a subset of
people with a common identity. I'm not sure who's on the other end of this
conversation or what the answer is, but it's interesting to see why and how
cultural divides occur and how countries cope with them.

Anyways, back to me. In Spain a few things immediately flipped: barnyard animals
filled up my roadside cheering section, the sun immediately emerged from behind
a thick curtain of clouds, I came across some great single trail, and Instagram
simply stopped, which as it being the final thread connecting me to social
media, I think happened for the best. And since the universe needs to remain
balance and I was due for some misfortune, a few miles after I crossed the
border, I went over my handlebars and landed a mere inches away from a dog turd.
This is actually the second time I flipped over my bars; both times I rode away
unscathed with just a busted ego and a mouthful of dirt.

![Dirt singletrack trail with beach in background](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/format:webp/1*UwnwSSXbwslyv_W05RNHNw.jpeg)
_View from the cockpit_

For the next however-many days, I was in this pendulum of good-then-bad luck.
I'd ride an hour in a rainstorm and then get a free churro. I'd misread my map
and unnecessarily climb an mountain, and then get a free Iberico ham sandwich.
I'd get trapped on busy road with passing trucks fraying my nerves and then get
a free pizza baguette thing. It actually turns out these free goodies are a
regional interpretation of tapas and are customary at any bar / restaurant /
café. With that said, maybe a more truthful positive would be biking through a
never-ending countryside of wildflowers that's dotted with forgotten stone
farmhouses being peacefully reclaimed by nature while a herd of pugs run beside
me to create the world's most ferocious peloton.

My first destination in Galicia was the _Museo do Alemán_ in the sleepy village
of Camelle. The story goes, a man from German simplified his name to Man and
hermitted away in an off-the-map town in which was once the end of the world. As
an artist, a naturalist, and a recluse, he spent his time cultivating a
sculpture garden that sprawled out from his front door. Somewhere between 50 and
a thousand years after he settled, a nearby oil tanker spilled and the ocean
washed barrels upon barrels of unrefined oil onto his life's work. Shortly
after, he died. In the years to follow his death, some form of entropy claimed
the rest of his work; either in the shape of an unusually violent storm or an
indolent mind behind a can of spray-paint.

Today, the town hosts a museum exhibiting what remains of Man's art and musing.
The town also displays imminent white buildings and a crescent shaped beach,
which according to the photographs scatted threw the town's establishments, is
typically sunny and thronged with happy families. Yet despite the propaganda,
what was most notable to me was the melancholy Man left behind. The towns
inhabitants, forced to consume this leftover sadness, all seem a shade dimmer.
The animals all seem slower and uninterested. It was palpable.

![One of Man's sculpture with the ocean as a backdrop](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/format:webp/1*11BwIy_S-aLzm6oON-W8eg.jpeg)
_One of Man's few remaining pieces_

n search of a mood change, I travel eastwards along the Atlantic coast. By this
point I've pedaled over 300km and my travel days begin to find a recurrent
groove:

A typical day began with some meditation and a breakfast consisting of delicious
fresh-squeezed OJ and some no-thrills bread. I'd then either find one of two
minor highways that stretch along the Atlantic or jump on the Camino del Norte-
one of the many pilgrimages to the _Catedral de Santiago de Compestela_. Around
midday I'd break to find a _panaderia_ (bakery) and _fruteria_ (fruit and veggie
stand), and then picnic in the town plaza. Roughly 80km from when I started,
I'll have reached my hostel/hotel/Airbnb, in which I'll plan for the next day,
explore the town, eat dinner, sleep, and repeat. If that's the outline, color in
some interesting/strange/nice/mean people, beautiful landscapes, photogenic
landmarks, lesser known wonders, cow poop, quasi-stray dogs, gelato, espresso,
majestic white horses standing stoically in an open field, a little more gelato
and you'd have my typical day.

My first break from the travel day painted above was in the city of A Coruña. A
city ahead of its time, A Coruña backlashes against the standard European
narrative and stars a woman as the central role. Up to now, the historic
landmarks I've seen have had one of the following stories: A man built this
while in war with other men, a man build this to express his love to a woman,
who most likely had no say in the matter, or a man build this to prove he
possesses some characteristics only a man such as himself could have possessed
(See: every monument to Hercules).

When A Coruña hosted the battle that every European town is destined to host,
the men all saw a possibility of defeat, sunk into themselves, and gave up. When
it was time for the hero to arrive, Maria Pita climbed above everyone and
shouted _“Quen teña honra, que me siga”_ (Whoever has honor, follow me). The
tides turned and A Coruña was saved. From the perspective of a traveler, A
Coruña now promotes a more progressive message with femininity at the core. How
and if this messages transfers to societal status, I'm not sure.

A couple hundred kilometers after A Coruña, I enter the ancient historic
communities of Asturias and Cantabria. Though they're two separate autonomous
communities that have two unique histories, they find a commonality with their
love of cider and stinky cheese. In both regions, I didn't feel especially awed
by their cities or food. Most of the time, their cities could hold my interest
for no more than 48-hours before I felt a need to travel onward. Yet, wherever I
was and whomever I was with, cider and potent cheese was always in the picture.

The cider of northern Spain is equal parts drink and theater. Typically served
in a bottle slightly too large for the individual drinker, drinking cider is
group activity. And because the fermentation process leaves the cider only
partly carbonated, the bartenders have developed a special pouring technique to
reinvigorate the drink. With arms fully extended, the bartender will hold the
bottle overhead and a skewed glass directly under it. Then without focusing on
either the bottle above or the glass below, the bartender slowly pours the cider
so it falls a wingspan distance before landing in the crescent opening of the
tilted glass below.

![Me trying my hand at pouring cider while unimpressed locals watch](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:1400/format:webp/1*Jzicten3wUn80azrXLk6Sg.jpeg)
_Me trying my hand at pouring cider while unimpressed locals watch_

A few billion pedals later, I reach my destination: Bilbao. Along the way I
reach some beautiful and curious places and meet some even more beautiful and
curious people; yet their stories won't find their way in here. Instead, I'll
fill this space with some personal musings that will perhaps lead us in a
different and unexpected direction:

Before my trip I read articles trumpeting the benefits of travel, while during
my trip, I meet too many people either answering impossible questions or
explaining to me that a traveler's life is the best life. Personally, I'm
unconvinced that travel is the best medicine; or even a medicine at all.

Before this trip I was stuck. To get out the rut I was in, I put myself on a
mental diet, which included meditating, journaling, and a framework that allowed
newness into my daily experience. I then took my newly formed mind overseas. I
believe it was my mental structuring that gave richness to my trip and not the
other way around.

The problem I find with the traveling-is-the-answer mindset is that it places
you either in the wrong timeframe or it misidentifies the solution. When
traveling for a purpose, it focuses your attention on the past and future. _What
could I have done differently had I known what I do now? How can I bring this
new experience into my life back home?_ Thoughts of this nature- thought that
bring you away from the present moment- can be extremely beneficial, but like
your favorite _vino verdo_, it should be done moderately and doesn't need to be
enjoyed overseas. Additionally, while traveling, you may find curiosities and
interests that initiates a drive to experience new things and grow. I understand
that a change of setting may lead to a betterment of self; however, what most
people miss is the aforementioned personal growth was actualized by the
individual and not the surroundings. Traveling may have nudged you in the right
direction, but it was the individual that did all the heavy lifting.

## Afterword

This was just the first leg of my travels. From Bilbao, I'll travel into the
Pyrenees, then along the Mediterranean coast, ferry to Tunisia, and then again
to Italy. Today, we'll leave it here, but maybe tomorrow I'll continue the
story. In any case, thanks for reading! 🚲
