src/content/blog/isolated-ai-with-nextjs.mdx, before:

---
title: "Isolated AI with Nextjs"
description: "Thoughts on how best to utilize AI in a Nextjs app"
pubDate: "Nov 11, 2024"
link:
  type: "github"
  url: "https://github.com/blakenetz/Forage"
---

# Isolating AI with Next.js

As much as I enjoyed building
[this website](https://github.com/blakenetz/portfolio) with Remix, I wanted to
give arguably the largest/most popular SSR React framework a shot:
[Next.js](https://nextjs.org/). So, I built a 2-page recipe aggregate that will
scrape and standardize my favorite recipe sources, and then display them in a
pretty grid. Oh, and because it's the year 2024, I had to include an LLM
component. Tutorials are a dime a dozen, so I'm writing this less as a
comprehensive deep dive, and more as contemplation.

## "Should" or "Could" with AI Tooling

### Applied AI

[Jack Herrington](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=egUNQ1pvkYs&t=626s) has some
interesting thoughts on the progression of AI development, or rather, app
development using AI. His focus is on "applied AI" or how AI is being utilized
by the developer. To sum it up, the progression ladder goes as following:

1. **Prompt Engineering**: This is the most rudimentary level of AI interaction.
   As the name suggests, a user simply provides an LLM with a prompt and
   captures the output.
2. **RAG**:
   [Retrieval-Augmented Generation](https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/what-is-retrieval-augmented-generation/)
   is a technique that involves defining a context for the AI. In practice, it
   means providing a dataset that will be parameterized into the LLM. When the
   AI generates content, the output will be constrained to the data provided,
   thus reducing the amount of hallucinations.
3. **Chaining AI**: This is essentially just the natural next step. By chaining
   model outputs, we're essentially creating a robust parameterized
   knowledge-set.
4. **Fine Tuning and Creating Models**: The last two steps transform the
   developer's role from a consumer to a contributor. In essence, it's
   internalizing all the steps above into a single custom-built model that is
   domain-specific.

### Pure AI

In software engineering, consistency and predictability is king, which is how we
came about [pure functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pure_function) and
[idempotency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence). AI is exactly the
opposite. It's a black box where variability can be constrained, but never fully
encapsulated. Even if graduating through all the steps above, if you provide a
model with the same prompt a million times, you'd most likely receive a million
different responses.

When thinking about how to incorporate an LLM into this project, I realized that
there's no need to integrate a model into the app. The I/O in each layer of the
app requires regularity. But that doesn't mean I can't employ an LLM into the
development process.

## Forage App

Now back to the project at hand. As I mentioned above, I'm going to give a quick
highlight to the how/what/why of Next.js, React 19, and developing this app. For
the most part, I stuck to a core features instead of reaching outwards to
libraries.

### Let's Talk AI

I really wanted to integrate a LLM somewhere within this somewhat contrived app,
but honestly, I couldn't find a reasonable "why." Each layer of the app was
designed to be pure and layering in an LLM was just adding unpredictability,
which typically cascades into instability. The app went roughly as follows:

```
-----------------------------
|           Client          |
-----------------------------
              |
              v
-----------------------------
|        Server Action      |
-----------------------------
              |
              v
-----------------------------
|     External API call     |
-----------------------------
              |
              v
-----------------------------
|           Client          |
-----------------------------
```

Any LLM layer would just be plain silly and expensive considering how many
tokens it would require. So instead, I integrated it into my workflow. This
project required a lot of busy work via DOM selectors. Essentially, I would make
a simple call to the recipe source, parse out the returned HTML, and then
extract each recipe node. Since the returned HTML structure is more or less the
same on each subsequent API call, I prompted an AI chatbot with the said
document and request the selectors in return. To build in some resiliency, I
also retrieved a set of query selectors, so if one failed, we'd simply move on
to the next until we hit a match.

### Server Actions and Server Components

As we further evolve towards SSR, React
[server actions](https://react.dev/reference/rsc/server-actions) are way to
delineate the environment a function should be call. By using a `use server`
directive inside a function, we are telling React to create a reference to the
server function that's accessible to the client. In the following for the `/`
route, I do a very minimal amount of form validation on the server:

```tsx
import { Text, TextInput, Title } from "@mantine/core";
import { IconSearch } from "@tabler/icons-react";

import styles from "./home.module.css";
import { redirect } from "next/navigation";

export default function Home() {
  async function search(formData: FormData) {
    "use server";

    const value = formData.get("q");

    if (value) {
      const searchParams = new URLSearchParams({ q: value });
      redirect(`/search?${searchParams.toString()}`);
    }
  }

  return (
    <main className={styles.main}>
      <Title>Forage!</Title>
      <Text>Find your next meal</Text>
      <form action={search}>
        <TextInput leftSection={<IconSearch />} size="lg" radius="lg" />
      </form>
    </main>
  );
}
```

\*[Github link](https://github.com/blakenetz/Forage/blob/main/app/page.tsx)

In this example, when a user submits the form, a network request to `search` is
made, the `formData` is handled, and either returns `void` or performs a
redirect (in which another RSC is rendered and sent to the client).

There's a couple things to note here:

There is no `use server` directive on the top level because Next.js has
designated RSC as the default options, which means client components are opt-in
only. Before being sent to the client, React will first "render" the component
once and only once. During this process, it will see that the `search` function
is server-only and will declare it in the server enviro and pass a reference to
the `Home` function. If we excluded the directive, then the function would be
declared within the scope of the `Home` function, or in other words, it would be
treated as any other function declaration. Because I don't have any other state
items and am relying on the browser to handle the form state, I can simply pass
a single action to the form.

This render-once behavior also allows for `async` components. Take the following
example:

```tsx
import { param } from "@/util";
import { redirect } from "next/navigation";

import { fetchRecipeData } from "./actions";
import View from "./components/view";

export default async function Search({
  searchParams,
}: {
  searchParams: { [param]: string };
}) {
  const query = searchParams[param];
  if (!query) redirect("/");

  const data = await fetchRecipeData(query);

  return <View data={data} />;
}
```

\*[Github link](https://github.com/blakenetz/Forage/blob/main/app/search/page.tsx)

Again, no `use client` directive, so Next.js will render this once on the
server, wait until all promises are resolved, and then send to the client.

That pretty much sums it up. If you'd like to hear more, then please leave a
comment below!

Commit message:

Dev (#82)
* remove references to comment section

* added error screen

* clean up links. added external link component for blog markdown. added pepita page

* added images of pepita

* move assets to assets dir. update pepita page

* udpate layouts

* more layout updates

src/content/blog/isolated-ai-with-nextjs.mdx, after:

---
title: "Isolated AI with Nextjs"
description: "Thoughts on how best to utilize AI in a Nextjs app"
pubDate: "Nov 11, 2024"
link:
  type: "github"
  url: "https://github.com/blakenetz/Forage"
---

# Isolating AI with Next.js

As much as I enjoyed building
[this website](https://github.com/blakenetz/portfolio) with Remix, I wanted to
give arguably the largest/most popular SSR React framework a shot:
[Next.js](https://nextjs.org/). So, I built a 2-page recipe aggregate that will
scrape and standardize my favorite recipe sources, and then display them in a
pretty grid. Oh, and because it's the year 2024, I had to include an LLM
component. Tutorials are a dime a dozen, so I'm writing this less as a
comprehensive deep dive, and more as contemplation.

## "Should" or "Could" with AI Tooling

### Applied AI

[Jack Herrington](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=egUNQ1pvkYs&t=626s) has some
interesting thoughts on the progression of AI development, or rather, app
development using AI. His focus is on "applied AI" or how AI is being utilized
by the developer. To sum it up, the progression ladder goes as following:

1. **Prompt Engineering**: This is the most rudimentary level of AI interaction.
   As the name suggests, a user simply provides an LLM with a prompt and
   captures the output.
2. **RAG**:
   [Retrieval-Augmented Generation](https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/what-is-retrieval-augmented-generation/)
   is a technique that involves defining a context for the AI. In practice, it
   means providing a dataset that will be parameterized into the LLM. When the
   AI generates content, the output will be constrained to the data provided,
   thus reducing the amount of hallucinations.
3. **Chaining AI**: This is essentially just the natural next step. By chaining
   model outputs, we're essentially creating a robust parameterized
   knowledge-set.
4. **Fine Tuning and Creating Models**: The last two steps transform the
   developer's role from a consumer to a contributor. In essence, it's
   internalizing all the steps above into a single custom-built model that is
   domain-specific.

### Pure AI

In software engineering, consistency and predictability is king, which is how we
came about [pure functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pure_function) and
[idempotency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence). AI is exactly the
opposite. It's a black box where variability can be constrained, but never fully
encapsulated. Even if graduating through all the steps above, if you provide a
model with the same prompt a million times, you'd most likely receive a million
different responses.

When thinking about how to incorporate an LLM into this project, I realized that
there's no need to integrate a model into the app. The I/O in each layer of the
app requires regularity. But that doesn't mean I can't employ an LLM into the
development process.

## Forage App

Now back to the project at hand. As I mentioned above, I'm going to give a quick
highlight to the how/what/why of Next.js, React 19, and developing this app. For
the most part, I stuck to a core features instead of reaching outwards to
libraries.

### Let's Talk AI

I really wanted to integrate a LLM somewhere within this somewhat contrived app,
but honestly, I couldn't find a reasonable "why." Each layer of the app was
designed to be pure and layering in an LLM was just adding unpredictability,
which typically cascades into instability. The app went roughly as follows:

```
-----------------------------
|           Client          |
-----------------------------
              |
              v
-----------------------------
|        Server Action      |
-----------------------------
              |
              v
-----------------------------
|     External API call     |
-----------------------------
              |
              v
-----------------------------
|           Client          |
-----------------------------
```

Any LLM layer would just be plain silly and expensive considering how many
tokens it would require. So instead, I integrated it into my workflow. This
project required a lot of busy work via DOM selectors. Essentially, I would make
a simple call to the recipe source, parse out the returned HTML, and then
extract each recipe node. Since the returned HTML structure is more or less the
same on each subsequent API call, I prompted an AI chatbot with the said
document and request the selectors in return. To build in some resiliency, I
also retrieved a set of query selectors, so if one failed, we'd simply move on
to the next until we hit a match.

### Server Actions and Server Components

As we further evolve towards SSR, React
[server actions](https://react.dev/reference/rsc/server-actions) are way to
delineate the environment a function should be call. By using a `use server`
directive inside a function, we are telling React to create a reference to the
server function that's accessible to the client. In the following for the `/`
route, I do a very minimal amount of form validation on the server:

```tsx
import { Text, TextInput, Title } from "@mantine/core";
import { IconSearch } from "@tabler/icons-react";

import styles from "./home.module.css";
import { redirect } from "next/navigation";

export default function Home() {
  async function search(formData: FormData) {
    "use server";

    const value = formData.get("q");

    if (value) {
      const searchParams = new URLSearchParams({ q: value });
      redirect(`/search?${searchParams.toString()}`);
    }
  }

  return (
    <main className={styles.main}>
      <Title>Forage!</Title>
      <Text>Find your next meal</Text>
      <form action={search}>
        <TextInput leftSection={<IconSearch />} size="lg" radius="lg" />
      </form>
    </main>
  );
}
```

\*[Github link](https://github.com/blakenetz/Forage/blob/main/app/page.tsx)

In this example, when a user submits the form, a network request to `search` is
made, the `formData` is handled, and either returns `void` or performs a
redirect (in which another RSC is rendered and sent to the client).

There's a couple things to note here:

There is no `use server` directive on the top level because Next.js has
designated RSC as the default options, which means client components are opt-in
only. Before being sent to the client, React will first "render" the component
once and only once. During this process, it will see that the `search` function
is server-only and will declare it in the server enviro and pass a reference to
the `Home` function. If we excluded the directive, then the function would be
declared within the scope of the `Home` function, or in other words, it would be
treated as any other function declaration. Because I don't have any other state
items and am relying on the browser to handle the form state, I can simply pass
a single action to the form.

This render-once behavior also allows for `async` components. Take the following
example:

```tsx
import { param } from "@/util";
import { redirect } from "next/navigation";

import { fetchRecipeData } from "./actions";
import View from "./components/view";

export default async function Search({
  searchParams,
}: {
  searchParams: { [param]: string };
}) {
  const query = searchParams[param];
  if (!query) redirect("/");

  const data = await fetchRecipeData(query);

  return <View data={data} />;
}
```

\*[Github link](https://github.com/blakenetz/Forage/blob/main/app/search/page.tsx)

Again, no `use client` directive, so Next.js will render this once on the
server, wait until all promises are resolved, and then send to the client.

That pretty much sums it up. If you'd like to hear more, then please share this and tag me!
